[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Our world today seems
to be in total upheaval.
Many people are wondering
if, in fact, we have not
reached the biblical end times.
But how can we know?
Are we simply to be
spectators to these events?
Or have we been
given information--
messages that offer hope or
even help avoid these disasters?
In 2004, a particle physicist
working independently
made a discovery
that could change
everything we think we know
about the world we live in.
Could it be that something
as inconsequential
as this tiny fiber contains such
a message for the entire world?
Have new ways of obtaining
long hidden information
been discovered?
>> The emissions from a
physical object or when studied
as a whole uniquely identify
events in the history of that
object.
>> Have scientists finally
discovered where to look
for the secrets of the universe?
>> And we have a piece of cloth.
And it leads us to a mysterious
gate, which opens for us.
And it lets us to see a
completely different world,
an extraordinary world
with extraordinary laws.
>> What is this
mysterious gateway?
And what are these
extraordinary laws that
are only now being discovered?
Could it be that time, space,
and energy interact in a way
never before predicted?
>> Physicists are always trying
to find unifying principles.
Is there a unifying principle of
the very, very large relativity
and the very, very small
quantum physics, which
if we could see what
that principle was,
we could explain everything?
>> Has that principle
been discovered?
Is modern science now
beginning to decode
messages that might even be
coming from another dimension?
Is there something on the
scientific horizon that
suggests we have finally been
given the secrets of life
itself--
perhaps even eternal life?
>> There's something
which produces the order
of the universe.
Now the big problem
is we don't quite
know what that something is.
So even though I talk like
we do, believe me, folks.
There's a big mystery still out
there waiting to be discovered.
>> The nature of time, the
creation of the universe,
and perhaps even a link
to another dimension--
can these great riddles of
the universe be solved through
the lens of the ancient past?
In the next hour, you will
stand at the threshold
of today's most stunning
scientific discoveries.
Images never before
seen will reach out
from the dust of antiquity and
touch your life today in ways
you never thought possible.
In a moment, scholars,
scientists, and historians
all come together in an amazing
and unflinching investigation
into the fabric of time.
In a world where
children grow up
playing with computers
and calculus is frequently
part of the high
school curriculum,
many of the scientific
mysteries of the past
are today commonplace knowledge.
Yet, even the world's
leading scientists
would agree that when it comes
to understanding the universe
we live in and the physical
laws that we think govern it,
only a very few of the threads
that make up this vast tapestry
have been untangled.
But these few threads
are endlessly intriguing.
Einstein's theory of relativity,
quantum mechanics, particle
physics all taunt
us with the notion
that perhaps we can
know the unknowable.
Yet, these studies
have only begun
to reveal the intricate
interweaving of forces
that make up the universe.
Is it possible these lofty
scientific pursuits are being
advanced exponentially by
the information contained
in one ancient, Earthly,
hand-woven piece of cloth?
Some scientists say yes.
But in order to understand
how that could be,
we must first understand the
secrets these scientists are
trying to uncover.
>> The basic ideas behind
quantum physics and relativity
are really quite simple.
The laws of physics are the same
for all observers regardless
of where they are and
how fast they're going.
>> The universe that this model
leads us to is an intelligent,
self-organizing, creative,
learning, trial and error,
participatory, interactive,
non-locally interconnected
evolutionary system.
That's what it's all about.
>> That may seem simple
enough to the scientists.
But how can an awareness
of these concepts
help us understand the
meaning of why we're here
and where we're going?
Is there some
deeper understanding
that can be gained through
all of this scientific study?
>> Why do we care about quantum
physics and relativity so much?
Well, basically they're really
very beautiful theories.
But if that's all they were, we
wouldn't care very much at all.
What we feel, though, is
that they're gateways.
They're leading us into new ways
of understanding the universe.
And that we care
about very much.
>> I sincerely think that
through these studies,
we will come upon a completely
new structure of physics,
maybe even a completely
different world.
>> Science has discovered the
basic structure of the entire
universe by studying the
tiniest possible things.
And they did it with the largest
scientific instruments ever
built. One such instrument is
16 miles long, fills a mountain,
and searches for particles
a trillion times smaller
than a human hair.
But why?
Why search for the
tiniest of tiny particles?
>> It's been known for a long
time that all physical matter
emits and reabsorbs
particles of energy.
Over 100 years ago, Max Planck
named these emissions quanta
or quantum singularly.
And they have been the
study of particle physics
for over 100 years.
And if you analyze
all the emissions
from any physical object, that's
called a quantum hologram.
We now understand that all
physical objects have a quantum
hologram.
>> That study has produced a
set of laws that scientists call
the standard model.
This is the theory
that summarizes
the scientists'
current understanding
of elementary particles and the
fundamental forces of nature.
>> In fact, what's going on in
the standard model of particle
physics is extremely mind
bending and paradoxical.
For example, the standard model
says that there are inside
of the nucleus invisible
particles-- particles we never
see on their own called quarks.
And no one has ever
seen a single quark.
In spite of the fact that
we've achieved a lot of success
in physics, there's
still a lot of mystery
here yet to be discovered.
>> But assuming all
of this is true,
where can we begin to look for
a meaningful example of what all
of this means to you and me?
Is it all just some cosmic
Rubik's cube for scientists
to play with?
Or is it possible there
is a broader purpose--
ancient information
perhaps-- that
is even more relevant today.
In the late 1970s, scientists
developed a computer program
that allowed NASA technicians
to read the terrain
characteristics of
distant planets derived
from two-dimensional
satellite photographs.
But the developers of
this amazing device
were in for a shock
when they were
asked to analyze a photograph
of something most of them
had never even heard of.
Actually what they
were looking at
was a two-dimensional photograph
of a two-dimensional artifact.
But to everyone's
amazement, from somewhere
there emerged
three-dimensional information.
To these practical
scientists, it
was as if they were looking at
something from another planet.
None of them had ever seen
anything like this before.
A photograph of an ancient cloth
had brought the scientists face
to face with the impossible.
Three--dimensional information
was being discovered where it
couldn't possibly exist.
Suddenly, a broad
range of scientists
took a professional
interest in what
had been for those who were
even aware of it nothing more
than a mild curiosity.
But for one particle
physicist, this tiny fiber
generated the most excitement.
It is a single thread
from that same cloth.
And resting on its
surface is the hint
of an image that
is barely visible.
Could it be that somewhere
in the origins of this image
lay the secrets of the universe?
The artifact was
the Shroud of Turin.
And without a doubt, it is
the most picked at, X-rayed,
examined, revered, reviled,
tested, studied, scanned,
and photographed artifact
in the world today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For those who are unfamiliar
with this particular piece
of cloth, it has
long been revered
as the object
described in the Gospel
according to John Chapter
20 verses 6 and 7.
Referring to Peter,
John wrote, "He
saw the strips of
linen lying there,
as well as the burial cloth that
had been around Jesus' head.
The cloth was
folded up by itself,
separate from the linen."
For over 100 years,
researchers, historians,
and scientists of
every variety have
attempted to determine if
this linen cloth tucked away
in a cathedral in Turin,
Italy could actually
be the one referred to--
the burial shroud
of Jesus Christ.
An attempt was made
to discover the answer
to that question in 1978 when
a group of American scientists
were given unprecedented
access to the shroud for 5
intensive days.
Over the next several
years, this tireless group
known as the Shroud of
Turin Research Project,
or STRP for short,
which was comprised
of many of the world's
premier scientists
representing such diverse
disciplines as physics,
chemistry, engineering, forensic
medicine, and many others
spent no less than
150,000 man hours
studying, testing, and
interpreting the data.
The results seemed to
indicate the shroud could
be a genuine first century
burial cloth from somewhere
in Palestine.
But then in 1988,
carbon dating analysis
by three different
testing laboratories
produced quite a
different result.
>> The radiocarbon dates
that we obtained clearly put
the shroud, uh, in
the Middle Ages.
>> According to the
carbon-14 tests,
the shroud came into existence
somewhere between the years
1260 and 1390.
Could all the other
scientists be wrong?
First of all, we must
point out that the dating
of a shroud sample in 1988
was both controversial
and hotly disputed by
experts in many fields.
>> The problem of
dating a cloth--
not only the shroud, but I
think any cloth, any old cloth--
is not easy to solve
completely and definitely.
>> According to the professor,
the idea of a medieval origin
of the shroud leads to
an impossible thesis--
the forger would have had
to find a man to crucify,
flog him mercilessly,
place him in a shroud,
and then manufacture or
simply wait for the image
to somehow appear.
>> I think that is quite
impossible that what we cannot
do today--
it was very easy and
during a medieval period.
>> 150,000 man hours and the
work of dozens of scientific
disciplines were challenged--
actually brushed aside--
by a single carbon-14 test.
But the world was left
with the same question.
What created the image?
And how do all of these
latest scientific advances
lead us to this
particular artifact?
What is there about
the image that
causes scientists to
put their reputations
and fortunes at risk?
>> The Resurrection itself
belongs to the spiritual world.
And I don't think it is the
business of physics to--
to talk about it.
However, the shroud
itself and what
made the image leads us to
a mysterious gate, which
opens for us.
And it lets us to see a
completely different world,
an extraordinary world
with extraordinary laws.
>> What are those laws?
And do they exist regardless
of the age of the fabric?
Is this purely a
scientific squabble?
Or could it be there
is something here
that is far more important
than the artifact itself?
Is it possible that the energy
and information now being
detected is actually
the information
we need to help us overcome
the problems we face today?
Are the secrets
of the universe--
perhaps of all
creation-- locked up
in this seemingly ordinary
linen burial cloth?
Can the image-- now known
to contain three-dimensional
information-- also be
a quantum hologram?
Perhaps we should take
a moment and define
exactly what the
Shroud of Turin is
and what makes it so special
in the minds of so many people.
The shroud is an ordinary
piece of hand-woven fabric that
measures 14 feet 3 inches
long and 3 feet 7 inches wide.
These full-length dark lines
are scorches from the fire that
nearly destroyed it in 1532.
The diamond-shaped patches cover
holes resulting from that fire.
But it is the
faint, ghostly image
of a crucified man on the
surface of the cloth that
rivets our attention and
makes this piece of cloth
unique in all the world.
What is the truth
about the Shroud?
Is it a communication
from another time,
another dimension?
And if so, can we determine what
the message is intended to be?
Could it be that the quantum
revolution in physics
permits science to go
beyond human speculation?
According to some
physicists, the world
is even more extraordinary
than we thought.
Oddly enough, this
ordinary piece
of linen cloth that
many scientists believe
to be over 2,000 years
old might give scientists
their most tangible clue
to unlocking the secrets
of the quantum hologram.
Yet, some still maintain
the carbon-14 test
places its scientific value
under a cloud of suspicion.
>> There are hundreds
of pieces of evidence,
both scientific and historical,
that indicate that the Shroud
is authentic.
There is only one
piece of evidence
that says the shroud
is not authentic.
And that's carbon-14.
However, carbon-14 has
itself been much disputed.
It is neither logical,
empirical, or scientific
to take one piece of
evidence and ignore
the hundreds of
pieces of evidence
in support of authenticity.
>> We are faced
with a paradox here.
All of the scientific
analysis seems
to place the cloth in
Jerusalem in the first century.
But the carbon-14 test makes
the shroud unequivocally a 13th
century relic.
What if both
analyses are correct?
But how could the
carbon-14 tests
be as accurate as
modern technology can
make them and all of the
other scientific data that
places the cloth solidly in the
first century also be accurate?
That possibility was suggested
at the Sindone 2000 Worldwide
Congress in Orvieto, Italy.
Authors M Sue Benford and
Joseph Marino posited the notion
that a 16th century
invisible patch
had skewed the 1988 carbon-14
test on the sample taken
from the Shroud of Turin.
Their idea was backed
by what seemed to be
solid historical research.
But the whole notion
was immediately
rejected as being
technically impossible.
At this point another scientist,
one of the original STRP team,
became interested.
Like others who had closely
examined the shroud,
he, too, was very skeptical of
the whole idea of reweaving.
The late Raymond
Rogers set himself
the task of discovering
whether or not
scientific analysis could
resolve the issue once
and for all.
Rogers obtained
samples of the Shroud
immediately adjacent to the
area used in the carbon-14 test.
These were provided by
Gilbert Raes, the man who
had originally removed them.
In an interview unveiled
at the 2005 Dallas
Symposium on the Shroud,
Rogers told the interviewer--
>> This is just
about the last straw.
I've got the samples that
can shoot that full of holes.
So I got out the Raes samples.
And I got out some of
the shroud samples.
And I went to work again.
And lo and behold in
less than an hour,
I knew that the Raes
sample was totally
different in
chemical composition
than the main part
of the shroud.
And then the shocker
that really shook me up--
in looking at the
Raes threads, I
hit this one that was
an end to end splice.
And that's exactly
the sort of thing
that Benford and
Marino were talking
about in this
invisible reweaving.
>> After coming to
this conclusion,
ray called me one day
and said flat out, Tom,
there is no scientific
wiggle room.
>> Up to this point, then,
we can say with some degree
of scientific certainty that
the Shroud is an authentic first
century fabric.
Some scientists may
continue to disagree.
But for the moment at least,
the 1988 carbon-14 tests
on the Shroud appear to
have been invalidated.
In the meantime, a group of
digital scientists in Amsterdam
focused their expertise
on a different set of data
from the shroud.
What they found
stunned them all.
>> Holographic information
is encoded in the shroud
in an interference pattern.
And most probably there's
more information in it,
which I call like a blueprint
of the universe, maybe
an opening to a new science.
You come in an unknown land.
You don't have a GPS.
You don't have a map.
It's completely new.
You have to reinvent science.
And I think that is
one of the things
that the Shroud is all about.
>> But even if we are to accept
the shroud as a genuine first
century fabric, that's only
one piece of the puzzle.
Validating the age of
the fabric is important.
But the work being
done in Holland
promises even more
exciting revelations.
If the fabric has been proven
to be a genuine first century
material, could it be there
is supporting evidence
to suggest this very
fabric might, in fact, be
the actual burial
shroud of Jesus Christ?
Have these scientists discovered
something in the image
itself that places this piece of
cloth in a tomb near Golgotha,
which brings us to the next and
so far unanswered question--
how did the image get there?
There can be no doubt
that the Shroud of Turin
has been venerated
for hundreds of years
by the faithful as the
cloth or sheet that
covered the body of
the crucified Christ.
Nor can there be any doubt
that the Shroud exists.
It has been touched, handled,
photographed, and examined
in every way imaginable.
But has the result of all the
research, testing, and study
brought us any closer to proving
not only the age of the fabric,
but the reason for
its veneration?
There are those who insist
the authenticity of the shroud
has not been proven.
What's more, they
contend the idea
that it once wrapped
the crucified body
of the historic Jesus can
indeed never be proven.
Recently others have
challenged that assumption.
And the search for historic
and scientific evidence
that might corroborate the
authenticity of the shroud
goes on.
And even Cardinal Severino
Poletto, the papal custodian
of the Holy Shroud at
the cathedral in Turin
finds the search fascinating.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> My attitude toward science
is one of great respect.
And scientists, many scientists
in the world, study the shroud
and carry out research.
And they see what can
be discovered step
by step as studies proceed.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> And if science in the
future offers us well-founded
and incontrovertible elements,
we will always be delighted.
Pope John Paul II said that it
was not the task of the church,
but of the historians
and scientists to define
whether it is authentic or not.
>> For a significant
number of researchers,
at least some answers could very
well be found in a cathedral
in Oviedo, Spain.
>> In chapter 20 of
the fourth Gospel,
we read how the two disciples--
the beloved disciple and Peter--
ran to the tomb on Easter
morning having heard
that the tomb was empty.
Now there's been all
kinds of speculation
as to the position
of the cloths--
how they saw them.
But really that's unnecessary.
The original Greek text is
really quite clear on that.
>> And the other disciple
ran more quickly than Peter
and came first to the
tomb and stooping,
sees lying the sheets.
Comes, therefore, also
Simon, Peter following him,
and entered the tomb.
And he beholds the sheets
lying and the kerchief,
which was on the hit of him,
not with the sheets lying,
but apart, having been
wrapped up in one place.
What the researchers
and scientists
are hoping to establish is some
of what modern jurists call
corroborative evidence.
Does the kerchief in
Spain somehow match up
with the shroud in Italy?
Interestingly enough,
the scientific studies
to have been done
on the Sudarium
do, in fact,
support the findings
of the shroud researchers.
For example, modern
investigative techniques
permit the bloodstains
on the Sudarium
to be superimposed over
those on the shroud.
The result is astonishing.
>> The stains coincide in
the three main things--
first of all, the
blood group AB.
Second, stains corresponding
to the back of the head
are blood that was shed in life.
There are many
little stains that
were caused by some
kind of sharp object
that penetrated the skin.
By overlaying images
of the two cloths,
the blood stains-- the
actual shape of the stains
does coincide, which leads to
another medical conclusion.
These two cloths were used on
the same corpse as a purely
scientific conclusion.
Now if it covered the same
corpse as the Shroud of Turin,
well, obviously the shroud is
at least as old as the Sudarium.
>> But setting aside the
obvious similarities,
there is one very
important difference.
Unlike the history
of the shroud,
the history of the
Sudarium is undisputed.
And by firmly and
scientifically establishing
a direct correlation
between the two artifacts,
their value to the new quantum
physics is inestimable.
The modern controversy,
however, didn't really
begin until 1898 when a gifted
Italian photographer, Secondo
Pia, was given unprecedented
permission by the king of Italy
to photograph the shroud.
What he caught on his two
glass photographic plates
stunned the world.
The image on the cloth itself,
the faint, almost ghost-like
markings on the fabric,
actually appeared in reverse.
A positive image came
up on what should have
been a photographic negative.
For the first time in
history, the likeness
could be seen in
full majestic detail.
And the correlation
between the image
and the biblical description
of the crucifixion
was breathtaking
and unmistakable.
Skeptics and critics
immediately began to cry foul.
The very fact that
the image so closely
resembled the biblical
description was, they said,
proof that it was a forgery.
Yet, the image is
so striking, so
vivid that a modern forensic
analysis is possible.
Dr. Robert Buckland,
a former coroner
and forensic pathologist
for Los Angeles County,
is well acquainted with
the signs of violent death.
>> This is a body of a 5 foot
11 inch Caucasian male weighing
about 170 pounds.
On the head, there
are blood flows
from numerous puncture
wounds on the front, back,
and top of the head.
There's a swelling
over one cheek
consistent with a beating.
The right wrist is
covered by the left hand.
But there's a puncture
wound in the left wrist
consistent with the
crucifixion injury.
The classical artistic
and legendary portrayal
of nails through the
palms is incorrect,
because the
structures in the hand
are too fragile to hold up the
weight of a man of this size
without tearing free.
There are streams of
blood running down
both forearms originating
in the wrist areas
and controlled by gravity.
So the blood flows
toward the elbows
with the arms elevated
and outstretched.
On the back, there are
more than 100 lesions,
which appear to be
scourge or whip marks.
Historians have
indicated that the Romans
used a whip called a flagrum.
This implement had
two or three thongs.
And at their ends were
pieces of metal or bone,
which looked like
small dumbbells.
Here you can see how those end
pieces from a Roman flagrum
fit precisely into this
scourge lesions on the body.
Here on the front of the
body is a large bloodstain
resulting from
puncture of the chest
by an instrument like
a lance or a spear.
This weapon penetrated
the thoracic cavity
through the plural spaces
and into the heart.
Later after the corpse
was removed from the cross
and turned, blood dribbled
out of the chest wound
and puddled along the
small of the back.
There was an abrasion on one
knee consistent with a fall.
Finally, a spike has been
driven through both feet.
And blood leaked
from those areas
and has stained the cloth.
The evidence of a scourged
man who was crucified
and who died of postural
asphyxia and cardiopulmonary
failure is clear cut.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The corroborating evidence--
forensic, historical,
scientific, and circumstantial
as the lawyers might say--
is clearly in support
of authenticity.
>> The circumstantial evidence
in support of the authenticity
of the Shroud of Turin
is simply overwhelming.
In my professional
opinion, it would
meet the most stringent
evidentiary requirements
in a court of law beyond
a reasonable doubt.
>> All of the evidence with
the exception of the largely
discredited carbon-14 test
gives the Shroud of Turin a far
greater claim to authenticity
than virtually any other
ancient artifact,
or for that matter,
any other object on Earth.
But now scientists
say all of this
connects to the latest
quantum physics.
What is there about
the shroud that
binds these new scientific
discoveries to the old beliefs?
What of the single image bearing
fiber we spoke of earlier--
does the image itself
carry information?
Have the secrets just
now coming to light
in the scientific
world been hidden
in this stunning artifact
for hundreds of years?
Could it be we have yet to
learn that the universe does not
necessarily work the way we have
always been taught that it did?
So far we have been
able to establish
a scientific level
of authenticity
for the Shroud of Turin.
And we have seen how
science is discovering
a whole new realm of physics.
The question is how do these
two realities come together.
Could it be the answer
lies not with the fabric,
but with the image itself?
It is not simply
the fact that there
is an image on
this piece of cloth
that has so captivated the
interest of scientists,
historians, and theologians.
It is the nature of the
image that is so profound.
>> The shroud image is made
from tiny fibers that are 1/10
the size of a human hair.
And the picture elements are
actually randomly distributed
like the dots in your newspaper
photograph or magazine
photograph.
To do this, you would need
an incredibly accurate
atomic laser.
This technology does not exist.
>> According to the official
published findings of the STRP
scientific team regarding
the shroud image,
the actual image was created
by a phenomenon as yet unknown
or a momentous event that caused
a rapid cellulose degradation,
aging, of the linen fibers--
that is, an accelerated
dehydration and oxidation
of the very top linen
fibrils of the cellulose
fibers of the shroud,
thereby creating
a sepia or straw-yellow
colored image
similar to that of a scorch.
In other words, the image
was caused by something--
nobody knows what--
that affected only the
very top of the fibrils
that make up the fibers that,
in turn, make up the fabric.
>> After thousands of
hours of intense study,
the world was left with yet
another scientific enigma--
a piece of fabric that is
demonstrably hand-woven
containing a surface anomaly
and the shape and form
of a crucified man
created by some process
of undetermined origin.
>> There are other
striking anomalies as well.
For example, it
has long been known
that in addition to the explicit
detail of the body image,
there are also other
images that were somehow
transmitted onto the fabric--
specifically, the
image of flowers.
>> I first noticed the image of
flowers on the shroud in 1985.
And when I found what
they looked like, then
I began looking more
closely and found that there
were large numbers of these.
I went and got the
botany books of Israel
and spent the next four years
trying to identify these flower
images.
And by that time, I had
identified find these.
But I wanted a confirmation.
And so on a trip
to Israel in 1995,
I contacted Professor Avinoam
Danin, the world's authority
on the flowers of Israel, and
took some of our photographs
out there.
When I handed the
photograph that I had first
spotted the flowers on to
him without indicating what
we had actually found, he looked
at it for about 15 seconds,
said, those are the
flowers of Jerusalem.
He immediately knew that
this was a unique finding.
>> But once it was discovered
that there were other images
on the shroud, Dr. Whanger began
looking closer and found that
there were small
coins on each eye.
What significance could
that possibly have?
Dr. Alan Whanger in his
book, "The Shroud of Turin:
Adventure in
Discovery," points out
that not only are they there.
They present distinct
and profound clues
as to the date in
origin of the image.
>> The Father Francis Filas
was professor of the theology,
as well as a--
a scientist who investigated
the Shroud of Turin,
as well as a photographer.
He was working with a
group of researchers
who were attempting to identify
that what the projections are
over the eyes were--
thinking they might be coins.
And Dr. Filas had an
enlargement and made
of the excellent photographs
they had of the shroud
and noticed a patterning
over the right eye.
On an enlargement
of this, he noticed
that there were letters
which he interpreted as UCAI
and something that looked
like a shepherd's crook.
This is typical of the leptin
or the widow's might struck
by Pontius Pilate in the years--
in 29 AD to 33.
We can identify
the images of them.
And so we can identify
the particular coin
and know the origin as
well as the date, which
for both of them that we
identify were struck in 29 AD.
So this dates the shroud
back to the first century.
It also localizes that to Israel
since that these coins are just
the widow's might or the
common penny of the time,
and certainly would
not circulate either
outside of Israel or not
very long after the reign
of Tiberius Caesar to
which they were dedicated.
>> But how could an image
containing so much information
have been formed?
There are those who believe
the image could only
have been formed by a burst
of some sort of radiation.
But the simple fact is nothing
like the shroud image has ever
been found or reproduced.
But that's only the beginning
of the astounding information
to be gleaned from
this amazing image.
In spite of skeptics
and setbacks,
scientists continue
their search.
And Dame Isabel Piczek,
a particle physicist,
believes the shroud
has brought science
to the threshold of a whole
new understanding of physics.
While dealing with the position
of the body within the cloth,
she discovered one of those
mysterious properties that
cannot be, yet somehow is--
an interface that divides
the image transport into two
hermetically separate yet
simultaneous actions and forces
causing the shroud to be taut
and parallel on both sides,
creating a true event horizon.
>> In general relativity,
we have found that there are
certain things
called black holes.
Now the surface of a black hole
is called an event horizon.
And it's called that because
right at that surface--
right at that surface
the laws of physics
seem to change
character drastically.
>> When you look at the
image of the shroud--
the two bodies next
to each other--
you feel that it's a flat image.
But if you create, for instance,
a three-dimensional object as I
did-- the real body--
then you realize that there--
there is a strange
dividing element,
an interface from which
the image is projected up.
And the image is projected down.
The muscles of the body
are absolutely not crossed
against the stone of the tomb.
They are perfect.
It means that the body is
hovering between the two
sides of the shroud.
What does that mean?
That there is
absolutely no gravity.
Other strange things you
discover-- that the--
the image is
absolutely undistorted.
Now if you imagine that
the cloth was wrinkled,
tied, wrapped around the
body and all of a sudden
you see a perfect image,
which is impossible
unless the shroud was
made absolutely taut--
rigidly taut.
Everybody thinks that
the tomb signifies death.
Not at all-- the exact opposite.
The shroud and
the tomb signifies
an unbelievable
beginning, because the--
in the depth of the
collapsed event horizon,
there is something which
science knows as singularity--
that this is exactly
what started the universe
in the Big Bang.
We have nothing less
in the tomb of Christ
than the beginning
of a new universe.
>> For centuries, the shroud
has been viewed and analyzed
as a record of a death--
the end of the physical being.
But Isabel Piczek is
suggesting that it is, in fact,
just the opposite-- a
record not of an ending,
but a beginning, which
would suggest Resurrection
in its truest sense.
And according to
Dame Piczek, this
is the starting base
for the new physics.
But is Isabel Piczek
out on a limb of physics
where no one else wants to go?
Perhaps not-- recently
a group of scientists
trying to identify
those things that
are fundamental
to the way nature
works made some
startling discoveries.
Dr. Edgar Mitchell--
the sixth man
to walk on the moon, founder
of the Institute of Noetic
Sciences, author, and
lecturer explains.
>> The classical traditional
model in physics,
which began in Newtonian
times describes how particles
and atoms and molecules
move and recombine.
Even most of the 20th
century, physicists
only looked at the
particle aspect of it
and did not really
concentrate very much
on the informational aspect.
And it's only really
with the quantum hologram
that we have brought
information up
to a par of importance
with energy itself
and with physicality
so that we understand
that the universe
we live in not only
exists because of
its physicality,
but it's understood because
of this information.
And this is a
powerful new concept.
And all physical bodies have
such a holographic emission
that is available
non-locally, which
means throughout the universe,
non-locally at all times.
>> Could it be the event horizon
demonstrated by the image
on the shroud sent information
instantaneously throughout
the universe?
And does this mean
that the Resurrection
was a universal event?
>> Physics has achieved
a lot of success.
And we think that we have
pretty much everything.
But it turns out
we know we don't.
We know there are missing links.
We know there are puzzles
and infinities cropping up
all the time.
And believe me, people are
working to find some answers.
But in spite of our
successes, there
are still some
mysteries abounding.
>> Some scientists believe the
characteristics of the image
on the shroud, such as
three-dimensional information
from a two-dimensional
photograph,
the negative aspect
of the image,
and the fact that the image that
appears on the cloth virtually
free of distortion are
basically holographic.
>> The quantum hologram is
merely a method of describing
the total emissions from an
object very much like if you
look at your fingertip.
Then you look at one
of the little swirls
on your fingertip.
It doesn't tell you
very much about you.
But if you look at the swirls
on all 10 fingers all at once,
that's your fingerprint.
And it uniquely defines
you and identifies you--
the same thing with
a quantum hologram.
The emissions from
a physical object
when studied as a whole
uniquely identify events
in the history of that object.
>> Could it be that events
in the history of the Shroud
of Turin are still there for
us to discover, decipher,
and understand?
If the essence of physical law
is informational, then perhaps
the image on the
shroud has given us
not only a record
of the Resurrection,
but a description
of creation as well.
Could it be that
instead of science
proving the shroud is authentic
the image on the shroud
is proving the accuracy
of the science?
In the quest for
scientific authenticity,
has the miraculous meaning of
the shroud been rediscovered?
What would it mean to the
world if scientific research
and the faith of
generations could join hands
in perfect harmony?
Up to this point,
the evidence seems
to indicate that the
1988 carbon dating
of a small piece of
the shroud fabric
was at best compromised and
at worst completely useless
in addition to which, compelling
corroborative evidence has been
examined that places the shroud
and this Sudarium of Oviedo
on the same body.
Ongoing research,
meanwhile, has uncovered
a number of other
scientific anomalies
that place the shroud squarely
over the body of Jesus
Christ at the time of
his Resurrection early
in the first century, and
at the same time squarely
at the center of a 21st
century scientific paradigm.
This suggests a
new understanding
of our place in the universe
and how it all began.
We have also seen that
scientists are now
coming to grips with a
whole new basis of physics
fundamental to the
way nature works.
In one of the most exciting
discoveries to date,
Dr. Petrus Soons points
out that there is more--
perhaps much more to
this piece of fabric
than meets the eye, even
peering through a microscope.
In 1931, Giuseppe Enri, a
professional photographer,
was commissioned to make
a photographic record
of the shroud in connection
with a royal event, which
meant many photographs
would be taken.
Dr. Soons reasoned that if
the negatives of these photos
also contained
three-dimensional information,
a full hologram of the
image might be possible.
>> I contacted Dr. Alan
Whanger and his wife, Mary,
because I knew that he was under
possession of second and third
generation copies of the
negatives of the photographs
that were made in 1931
by a doctor [INAUDIBLE]
a professional photographer.
He made available
these negatives to me.
And I brought them to
Holland and in cooperation
with the Dutch
Holographic Laboratory,
we digitalized them.
And if a professional
looks at negatives,
he can see how much
information is in it.
So we estimated that it would
be about 200 to 300 megabyte.
But it proved to be that
most of the negatives
had information up
to 1 gigabyte, which
means 4 time the informations
that we estimated.
There could be still hidden
in these digitalized files
a lot of information that
we still don't know about.
>> At first glance, we
might think that negatives
of photographs taken some 75
years ago would be less likely
to yield usable data
than modern photographs.
But you have to remember that
the techniques used back then
required much longer exposure
times and more light, which
means there is very likely much
more information on the 1931
Enri negatives than on any of
the more modern photographs.
>> Dr. Soons took the negatives
to a holographic science
laboratory in Amsterdam to
see if they would be willing
to test his theory.
>> So when I came there with my
photographs and told them there
was 3D information in it, they
were very skeptical about it,
because normally you don't make
a hologram of a photograph.
Then they started experimenting.
And they found out
that it could make
a hologram of this material.
>> To correctly view these
specially processed images
of the holograms, please
use your 3D glasses.
>> It is very important
to notice also that we
didn't change any data.
So all the information that
is in the digitized files
is also in the holograms.
What we did in the
laboratory is we
checked the whole shroud
for existing 3D information.
the only 3D information
that we have found
was in the image of the body.
All the rest that, for
example, Dr. Alan Whanger
has discovered, for
example, the flower images--
that was a different
imaging process.
So basically you talk about
three different imaging
processing in the shroud--
that is, the blood,
which was direct contact.
The second was what Dr.
Alan Whanger has found--
for example, the flowers
that could have been Corona
discharge.
But it is-- was a
complete different process
than the image formation
of the body itself.
>> It's important to realize
that no other two-dimensional
image in existence has
been shown to contain
three-dimensional
holographic information.
The whole body of holograms
gave us the possibility
to see the image of the man
on the shroud and/or angles
that had never been seen before.
We could confirm a
couple of the findings
like, for example, the
round little objects
on top of the eyelets
that have been
interpreted as being coins.
We cannot see inscriptions.
But we can confirm that they
are solid metal objects.
And point of controversy
has always been the position
of the legs, because you
cannot see that very well
in the photographs.
On the hologram, of course,
it shows extraordinarily well.
The left leg was stretched.
The foot was put in a diagonal
position fixed to the cross.
And then the other foot--
the right foot-- was put
straight in a vertical position
on top of the other foot.
That's why the leg is banded.
And it was used one nail both
feet and fix them to the cross.
>> The hologram provided
yet another surprise for Dr.
Soons and his associates--
one they are only now
beginning to explain.
>> The most exciting things that
we found in that hologram was
under the beard in the neck.
It was known already
that it was a wide line.
But nobody could ever
say what that exactly
meant than what it was.
It's a solid object.
It is in the form like
something like an amulet
that was put there.
Now after studying
it for quite a while,
I could figure out that there
were letters on it on top
sticking out a little bit.
>> Well, it turns out that that
information on that plaque is
evident in some photographs
and not in others.
And the people at the Eindhoven
holographic lab in the Holland
found that slight variations
in focusing distance
brought that information out.
So on one photograph where
we had this information it
was just by pure luck that
everything was right there,
captured it.
And what's that that
is suggestive of
is that there is infinite--
different information
at different depths
into this image.
And Dr. Peter Soons thought
he saw letters there.
And he talk with a--
a rabbi and a
scholar, who is fluent
in the Aramaic and Hebrew.
And the letters are apparent.
And they translated those into
a meaningful phrase, which says
a lot about who this might be.
>> Now these letters are ABA--
aleph bet aleph, which is the
word aba, which means father.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now seeing the circumstances
here and where the emulate is,
that makes a lot of
sense, because Christ
used to call himself
also the Son of God,
the Son of the Father,
the Son of the Holy One.
So it is like saying the
amulet that was put probably
by the apostles over there, like
saying, here is the Son of God.
>> This information is going
to have to be checked out.
But if it were confirmed,
this would just
be along the line of several
other things that have
been written just recently--
I mean, literally hot
off the press books--
that are saying in
early Christianity
two messages were preached
from the very beginning--
Jesus is divine.
And He was raised from the dead.
Those two go-- are right
there at the beginning.
They didn't come decades later.
And of course, that's
the same proclamation
that we find in the
gospels and in Paul.
>> Could it be that it
is possible, after all,
to prove that this is not only
an authentic first century
cloth, but was, in fact, the
burial shroud of Jesus Christ?
But there was more--
in fact, there was much
more still to come.
Tom D'Muhala, while examining
the hologram close up,
asked Dr. Soons if a single
fibril from the image
area of the shroud was
sufficient for determining
whether the image contained
holographic information--
that is, if the shroud
itself was a hologram.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The answer had
exciting implications.
>> First, it's important to
understand what a hologram is.
Basically, a
hologram is a pattern
of interacting microscopic rings
or interference fringes not
unlike the pattern created
when a handful of pebbles
are tossed into a pond.
Every area of the
hologram sees and stores
information about
the whole image.
If you break a hologram
into multiple pieces,
you have multiple holograms,
each bearing information
about the whole image.
>> And that is important for
the Shroud of Turin also,
because the upper arms are
missing because of a fire
in 1532.
So if what I believe there
is holographic information
in the shroud, you would
be able to activate that.
You would see the whole body
of the man in the shroud,
including the
missing upper arms.
>> Testing is still being done
to determine if, in fact ,
the shroud image does carry
holographic information.
Dr. Soons has already seen
rings on the latest hologram
of the shroud image suggesting
that this may be the case.
Perhaps in the not
too distant future,
we may be able to create a
full unblemished hologram
from a very small area
of the shroud's image.
Indication of this can
come from a single fibril.
>> Having had a chance
to examine the holograms,
we asked both Dr. Alan Whanger
and Tom D'Muhala to tell us
if there's anything there they
hadn't seen before to give us
their impressions
of the new data.
>> The hologram does a
remarkable job of emphasizing
certain features on the shroud.
It gives a astonishingly--
a three-dimensional aspect
to this.
It makes some of the
features much more prominent.
Particularly, the scourge marks
that we see front and back
are astonishingly
revealed in the holograms.
Also we see certain
parts of the body,
such as the toes,
some of the hair,
and actually we think that
possibly one the elbows
on the holograms, which is
not really that apparent
on the regular photographs.
>> The discovery of the plaque
around the neck is particularly
significant.
And being able to
identify and translate
the letters into a
meaningful phrase
suggest not only who
this person was, but who
and what the people of that
time believed him to be.
Slowly but surely, science
seems to be giving us
the closest thing to literal
proof of biblical history
the world has ever seen.
There are other things as well.
For example, we can
clearly see there
is no distortion of the
dorsal or backside image.
The fact supports
Isabel Piczek's theory
of a true event horizon.
Had the body been lying on
rock when the image was formed,
distortion would have
been unavoidable.
There are several
remarkable attributes
to the shroud evident here that
aren't discussed very much.
The most obvious is
that it is still here,
that it has survived
through fire, flood,
and the ravages of time.
And even though it has presented
the faithful and scientists
alike with considerable
challenges,
it still has a message
for all mankind.
The more we work with
it, the more we discover,
and the more we come
to realize that this
could be a record of the literal
Resurrection of Jesus Christ.
>> The shroud is the
most astonishing object
that's in existence,
most intensely studied,
and the one that has the most
important information for we
human beings.
We have no question that
this is Jesus of Nazareth.
And we feel that the event,
which occurred approximately 30
to 36 hours after death
with the body disappearing
within the folded
shroud indicates
that some unique event, which
we call the Resurrection
had taken place--
probably the most
pivotal event in history,
which is exemplified and
witnessed by the shroud.
>> At least as far as the
Shroud of Turin is concerned,
science--
once thought to be the
enemy of all things
religious-- now seems to be
enjoying a new role as partner
in uncovering the truth.
But regardless of the
scientific, archeological,
or theological
determinations, people
have come to their own
conclusions about the shroud--
what it is and where it came
from, and the meaning it
holds for them.
At this point in time,
it seems unlikely
that carbon-14 tests or
polarized light microscopes
or any of the other so-called
tests advanced by the skeptics
will do much to change
their conclusions.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> Probably this gift comes
directly from Jesus if we also
want to say that it appeared
at a certain moment of history.
And meanwhile, we are
not able to explain
the origin of the
image, which continues
to be a great mystery.
The shroud always remains
an instrument of Providence,
given to the church to announce
in a rather more sensitive way
also in an exterior way that
great mystery of a love that
could not be greater.
>> But could it be that the
image on the shroud is telling
us there is something
beyond death?
>> Until modern times, science
has not concerned itself too
much with how we
know what we know.
It's based upon information.
But science has not looked
at the subjective experience,
nor exactly how we
perceive what we perceive.
But this quantum holographic
development and understanding
is changing all of that.
That helped us get a new
handle on how information
is utilized in living
organisms-- something we've
never had before.
>> The researchers and
scientists continue to explore
all possibilities.
And the Shroud of
Turin has apparently
given the scientific
world a whole new quantum
paradigm to think about.
This astonishing
artifact has brought
to light a whole new world
of scientific and religious
possibilities.
Is the Shroud of Turin, in
fact, a physical and scientific
record of what has
been regarded up
until now as a purely
spiritual event
the literal Resurrection
of Jesus Christ?
Could it be, as Dame
Piczek suggests,
the evidence of a new
beginning and the threshold
of a revolution in physics
that can open the door
to the meaning of the universe?
Or does it suggest the
existence of some unknown force
still waiting to be explored?
For two millennia, a mysterious
image on this piece of cloth
has comforted the faithful
and puzzled the skeptic.
Now with hundreds of
thousands of man hours
devoted to scientific analysis
of the shroud, perhaps
we can draw some conclusions.
Since nothing even
remotely approaching
the image on the shroud
has ever been found,
it seems fair to suggest
the image was intended
to be a message to mankind.
And if all of this is
true, wouldn't that
suggest the message
of the shroud
might simply be a
message of hope.
As each new scientific
discovery enhances
the meaning of the image of the
shroud, it seems to be saying,
look closer.
I have given truth to the world.
Bring it into the light.
Could it be that the
haunting beauty of a hologram
is the final clue to the true
identity of the man portrayed
by the image on the
Shroud of Turin?
[MUSIC PLAYING]